DOCS-867: Data and ML Tutorial (#2112)
viamrobotics/docs: docs/tutorials/services/data-mlmodel-tutorial.md

Your new model will begin training on the images you have tagged, and should be ready after a short time.
You can view your model's training progress from the **Models** subtab under the [**DATA** page](https://app.viam.com/data/view).
Models that are still being trained appear under **Training**, while models that have completed training and are ready for use appear under **Models**.

### Deploy and use your model

Once your new model has finished training, add the [ML model](/services/ml/) service and deploy your model to your smart machine to be able to use it to classify newly-captured images.

To deploy a new model to your smart machine:

1. On your robot's **Config** page in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to the **Services** tab.
1. Click the **Create service** button at the bottom of the page, and select **ML Model**, then select **TFLite CPU**.
1. Give the service a name, then click **Create**.
1. In the resulting ML Model configuration pane, select **Deploy model on robot**, then select the model you just trained from the **Models** dropdown menu.
1. Click **Save Config** at the bottom of the window to save your changes.

> 

Reviewer: Ah I see you did already put that in your notes :D

---
title: "Capture Data and Train a Model"
linkTitle: "Capture Data and Train a Model"
weight: 60
type: "docs"
description: "Configure data capture and cloud sync, filter and tag captured data, and train a new ML model."

> image: "/tutorials/data-management/data-captured-images.png"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
image: "/manage/ml/training.png"
```

imageAlt: "The data page of the Viam app showing a gallery of the images captured from the Viam Rover."

> images: ["/tutorials/data-management/data-captured-images.png"]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
images: ["/manage/ml/training.png"]
```

aliases:
  - "/tutorials/data-management-tutorial/"
  - "/tutorials/data-management/"
  - "/manage/data-management/data-management-tutorial/"
  - "/tutorials/services/data-management-tutorial/"
tags: ["data management", "data", "mlmodel", "vision", "services", "try viam"]
authors: []
languages: []
viamresources: ["data_manager", "mlmodel", "vision", "camera"]
level: "Beginner"
date: "8 February 2023"
cost: "0"
no_list: true
# SMEs: Alexa Greenberg, Natalia Jacobowitz
---

In this tutorial, you will use three Viam services together to enable a smart machine to recognize specific objects in the world around it:

- The [data management](#the-data-management-service) service, to capture images from a camera on your smart machine and sync them to the cloud.
- The [ML model](#the-ml-model-service) service, to manage and deploy a machine learning (ML) model based on these images, once you added tags to the images matching the objects you want to detect.
- The [vision](/services/vision/) service, to enable your smart machine's camera to detect objects defined in the ML model on its own.

> Working together, these services enable your smart machine to recognize its surroundings and make intelligent decisions about the world it sees.

Reviewer: [opt]
```suggestion
Working together, these services enable your smart machine to recognize its surroundings and make decisions about the world it sees.
```

{{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}

> To get started easily, you can rent a rover through [Try Viam](https://app.viam.com/try), which is pre-configured with everything you need to begin this tutorial.

Reviewer: I'm not sure what easily is supposed to indicate. Maybe better to try this without any hardware?
```suggestion
To try this right now, you can rent a rover through [Try Viam](https://app.viam.com/try), which is pre-configured with everything you need to begin this tutorial.
```

Author: You're right -- even better to mention "without any hardware" directly, I think!

   Leave the default settings as they are, and click **Save Config** at the bottom of the screen to save your changes.

   {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/data-management-conf.png" alt="The data management service configuration pane with default settings shown for both capturing and syncing" resize="600x" >}}

For more information, see [Add the data management service](/services/data/configure-data-capture/#add-the-data-management-service).

### Configure data capture for a component

Once you have added the data management service, you can configure data capture for specific components on your smart machine.
For this tutorial, you will configure data capture for images from a [camera](/components/camera/) component, but other data types such as sensor data or SLAM map data from other types of [components](/components/) can be captured as well.

To enable image data capture for a camera component:

1. On your robot's **Config** page in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to the **Components** tab.

> 1. If you have not already, add a [camera component](/components/camera/), such as a [webcam](/components/camera/webcam/), to your smart machine.

Reviewer: Since that is in the prerequisites I think that is fine
```suggestion
```

Author: Gotcha, really want to retain `cam` as the "find the camera for a Try session" guidance, but you're right that this should not sound prerequisite-y. Trying something different, let me know what you think!

>    If you are using a Viam Rover, the camera is pre-configured, and named `cam`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> 1. In your camera component configuration pane, find the **Data capture configuration** section, and click the **Add method** button to enable data capture for this camera.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the camera component configuration pane from your [configured camera](#prerequisites), find the **Data capture configuration** section, and click the **Add method** button to enable data capture for this camera.
```

Author: Ah, I see now. You're right, this is better!

   - Set the **Type** to `ReadImage` and the **Frequency** to `0.333`.
     This will capture an image from the camera roughly once every 3 seconds.
     You can adjust the capture frequency if you want the camera to capture more or less image data, but avoid configuring data capture to higher rates than your hardware can handle, as this could lead to performance degradation.

   - Set the **Mime type** to `image/jpeg` to configure image data capture.

     {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/camera-data-capture.png" alt="The camera component configuration pane with data capture configuration enabled using type ReadImage and a capture frequency of 0.333" resize="600x" >}}

1. Click **Save Config** at the bottom of the window to save your changes.

For more information see [Configure data capture](/services/data/configure-data-capture/#configure-data-capture-for-individual-components) and [Configure cloud sync](/services/data/configure-cloud-sync/).

### View and filter captured data

> Now that you have configured data capture on your camera component, you can view the resulting data files in the Viam app, and can apply filters to limit the files returned by specific criteria, such as by robot or date range.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now that you have configured data capture on your camera component, you can view the resulting data files in the Viam app.
You also have the option to apply filters—whether by robot, date range, or other criteria—to limit the returned files.
```
It may just be my specific brain, so please feel free to disregard. I paused at "to limit the files returned by specific criteria" because there are a few ways to interpret that, so I thought this might help a bit. Definitely a subjective experience!

Author: Much better, thank you!

> 1. First, in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), browse to your robot's **Control** tab and enable the camera to verify that a live stream is returned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. First, in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to your robot's **Control** tab and enable the camera to verify that a live stream is returned.
```

   If you do not see a functioning camera stream, verify that you have configured your [camera](/components/camera/) correctly.

1. Then, select the [**DATA** page](https://app.viam.com/data/view) from the top of the screen.

   {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/data-captured-images.png" alt="The data page showing a variety of captured images with search options presented on the left" resize="1200x" >}}

>    Here you can see the images captured so far from the camera on your smart machine.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Here you can view the latest captured images from the camera on your smart machine.
```

Just a suggestion for directness!

   New images should appear roughly every six seconds as cloud sync uploads them from your smart machine.

You can use the filters on the left side of the screen to filter your images by robot, component, date range, and more.
You can also use the **Copy export command** button to use the Viam CLI to [export captured data](/manage/cli/#data), if desired.

For more information see [View and filter data](/manage/data/view/).

## The ML model service

> Once your smart machine is capturing and syncing images to the Viam app, you are ready to train a new machine learning (ML) model using those image.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once your smart machine is capturing and syncing images to the Viam app, you are ready to train a new machine learning (ML) model using those images.
```

> You can use an ML model to help your smart recognize and adapt its behavior to the world around it.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use an ML model to help your smart machine adapt its behavior to the world around it.
```

Author: 🤦

> For this tutorial, you will train an ML model to be able to recognize specific objects, and then deploy that model to your smart machine using the _ML (machine learning) model service_.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this tutorial, you will train an ML model to recognize specific objects, and then deploy that model to your smart machine using the _ML (machine learning) model service_.
```
subjective suggestion for readability! I think the sentence sounds good the way it is as well.

Reviewer: I think we can even be more specific. It's shapes in this case:
```suggestion
For this tutorial, you will train an ML model to recognize specific shapes (for example red and blue stars), and then deploy that model to your smart machine using the _ML (machine learning) model service_.
```

> With a model deployed to your smart machine, the [ML model](/services/ml/) service can be used together with the [vision](/services/vision/) service to analyze newly-detected objects for a possible match to a known object.

Reviewer: Speak to the user.
```suggestion
With a model deployed to your smart machine, you can use the [ML model](/services/ml/ together with the [vision](/services/vision/) service to analyze newly-detected objects for a possible match to a known shape.
```

> To train a new model from your captured data, first tag your images with appropriate labels, train a new model based on those labels, then deploy the model to your smart machine.

Reviewer: bit much new
```suggestion
To train a model from your captured data, first tag your images with appropriate labels, train a model based on those labels, then deploy the model to your smart machine.
```

Author: You're right, no need to emphasize 'new' here, but also elsewhere. Removed 'new' in a bunch of places.

### Tag images

1. From the [**DATA** page](https://app.viam.com/data/view) in the Viam app, select an image captured from your smart machine that you would like to tag.
1. In the **Tags** field on the right-hand side, enter a new tag describing the object in the image that you want your smart machine to be able to identify, then click **Add as new tag**.
   Tag names support alphanumeric characters, underscores, and hyphens.

>    For this tutorial, you will use the objects shown in the [Try Viam](https://app.viam.com/try) test octagon, which include shapes like a red star and an orange triangle.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   For this tutorial, you will use the objects shown in the [Try Viam](https://app.viam.com/try) test octagon, which include shapes like a red star and an orange triangle.
   If you are not using a Try Viam rover, you can choose objects in your machines surroundings instead.
```

>    The image below shows adding the `red_star` tag to an image:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   The image below shows the `red_star` tag being added to an image:
```
I thought this could possibly place more emphasis on the tag itself

   {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/add-tag-red-star.png" alt="The tags and labels configuration pane of a selected image, with the text red_star entered as the tag" resize="350x" >}}

1. Repeat this process for other images that contain objects you want your model to be able to identify.

>    Once you have added a tag to an image, you can select that tag from the **Tags** drop down menu for other images that also feature the tagged object.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Once you have added a tag to an image, you can select that tag from the **Tags** dropdown menu for other images that also feature the tagged object.
```
I think this makes it a compound noun, or "drop-down"..?

Reviewer: we currently use drop down menu in other parts of the docs, but we also try to follow the rackspace style guide which does use dropdown. So let's go with that

   {{< alert title="Tip" color="tip" >}}

   For best results:

   - Provide at least 10 images of the same object, taken from different angles, and repeat this approach for each object you want your smart machine to be able to identify.
   - Include some images that do not contain any of the objects you wish to identify, but do not tag these images.

>    - If your smart machine operates in various lighting conditions, such as changing sunlight, include images of each object from varying lightning conditions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   - If your smart machine operates in various lighting conditions, such as changing sunlight, include images of each object from varying lighting conditions.
```

   - You can tag a single image with multiple tags if needed, but be sure to use `Multi label classification` when training your model later in this tutorial.

   {{< /alert >}}

> Feel free to return to your smart machine's **Control** tab to position your camera to capture additional images from a variety of different angles, or with different lighting or background compositions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Feel free to return to your smart machine's **Control** tab to position your camera (and rover) to capture additional images from a variety of different angles, or with different lighting or background compositions.
```

Generally, the more different perspectives of a given object you tag, the more likely your model will be able to identify it, even under differing conditions.
The following is an example of a good selection of images containing the `blue_star` tag, taken from a variety of angles:

{{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/filter-by-blue-star.png" alt="The data tab showing images that contain blue stars from various angles, with a search filter for blue_star applied to only show images tagged with that label" resize="1200x" >}}

If you want to remove a tag, click the **X** icon to the right of the tag name below the **Tags** field.

For more information, see [Train a model](/manage/ml/train-model/).

### Filter images using tags

> Once you have tagged your images, you can use those tags to filter your images to control which images to run your model on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Once you have tagged your images, you can use those tags to filter your images to control which images and run your model on.
```

tiny suggestion, it might change the intended meaning though which isn't my intention

> Once you have tagged your images, you can use those tags to filter your images to control which images to run your model on.

Reviewer: Given you're not really supposed to only train on images that have the red star...
```suggestion
Once you have tagged your images, you can use those tags to see all the images with specific tags.
```

To filter images by tag, use the **Tags** drop down filter on the left-hand side to select the tag you want to filter by, then click the **Search** button to limit displayed images to only those matching the provided tag.

For example, the following shows an images data set filtered to only show images tagged with the `red_star` tag:

{{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/filter-by-red-star.png" alt="The filtering pane on the left of the data page with the tag red_star checked and the search button shown" resize="250x" >}}

You can search for multiple tags at once, which will display images that match any of the included tags.
To reset a filter, and return to viewing all captured images, click the **Reset filters** button on the left, then click **Search** again.

### Train a new model based on a filter

Filtering images using tags also constrains the model you train to only those images you want to inform your model.

> This is especially useful when you may have captured a large number of images of a variety of objects, but only want to train a model to identify a few of them.

Reviewer: hmm I don't like that there's no images that don't cotnain the objects . I think it's better to suggest filtering by robot and time and then you select the labels for training on the right

To train a new model:

> 1. First, ensure that you have filtered your images by adding each tag you would like to use in your model using the **Tags** drop down filter on the left-hand side, then click **Search**.

Reviewer: see above

1. When you are happy with the images shown, click the **Train model** button in the upper-right.
1. Give your model a name, like `my-object-detector`, and select the **Model type**:
   - Use `Single label classification` if you only added one tag per image.
   - Use `Multi label classification` if you added more than one tag for some images.
1. Select the tags you want to train your model on from the **Labels for training** drop down, then click **Train model**.
   Unselected tags will be ignored, and will not be part of the resulting model.

>    If you do not see a tag you expected to see in the **Labels for training** drop down, ensure you have included that tag in the [search filter](#filter-images-using-tags) on the left.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you do not see a tag you expected to see in the **Labels for training** drop down, ensure your filtered images contain images with the label.
```

To deploy a new model to your smart machine:

1. On your robot's **Config** page in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to the **Services** tab.
1. Click the **Create service** button at the bottom of the page, and select **ML Model**, then select **TFLite CPU**.
1. Give the service a name, like `my-mlmodel-service`, then click **Create**.
1. In the resulting ML Model service configuration pane, select **Deploy model on robot**, then select the model you just trained from the **Models** dropdown menu.
1. Click **Save Config** at the bottom of the window to save your changes.

   {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/mlmodel-service-conf.png" alt="The ML model service configuration pane showing the required settings to deploy the my-classifier-model." resize="600x" >}}

## The vision service

Now that you have deployed a new ML model to your smart machine using the ML model service, you are ready to configure your camera to detect the objects you've tagged by using the _vision service_.
The [vision](/services/vision/) service enables a camera to, among other things, make use of deployed ML models to intelligently identify objects in in a camera feed.

> To enable your smart machine's camera to identify the objects you've tagged, first add the vision service, then add a transform camera to be able to use your ML model as a classifier.

Reviewer: It does work without a transform camera in code
```suggestion
To enable your smart machine's camera to identify the objects you've tagged, first add the vision service, then add a transform camera to be able to see the tagged objects on the control tab.
```

### Add the vision service

1. On your robot's **Config** page in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to the **Services** tab.
1. Click the **Create service** button at the bottom of the page, and select **Vision**, then select **ML Model**.
1. Give the service a name, like `my-vision-service`, then click **Create**.
1. In the resulting vision service configuration pane, select the ML model service you just added from the **ML Model** dropdown menu.
1. Click **Save Config** at the bottom of the window to save your changes.

   {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/vision-service-conf.png" alt="The vision service configuration pane showing the ML model service my-mlmodel-service added" resize="500x" >}}

### Add a transform camera

1. On your robot's **Config** page in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to the **Components** tab.
1. Click the **Create components** button at the bottom of the page, and select **Camera**, then select **Transform camera**.

> 1. Give the camera a name, like ``, then click **Create**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Give the camera a name, like `my-transform-cam`, then click **Create**.
```

1. In the resulting camera components configuration pane, enter the following into the **Attributes** section for the transform camera:

   ```json {class="line-numbers linkable-line-numbers"}
   {
     "pipeline": [
       {
         "type": "classifications",
         "attributes": {
           "classifier_name": "my-vision-service",

>            "confidence_threshold": 0.6

Reviewer: To match the screenshot
```suggestion
           "confidence_threshold": 0.5
```

         }
       }
     ],
     "source": "cam"
   }
   ```

   If you are not using a Try Viam rover, replace `cam` with the name of the configured camera on your smart machine.
   The `confidence_threshold` controls how confident the model must be in order to present a matching object tag, on a scale of `0.0` - `1.0`, with `1.0` representing a 100% match requirement.
   The more and varied images you have captured and tagged, the more confidently your model can identify the objects you have tagged.

   {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/transform-cam-conf.png" alt="The transform camera component configuration pane showing the required attributes entered" resize="500x" >}}

1. Click **Save Config** at the bottom of the window to save your changes.

## Test object detection

Your smart machine is now ready to detect the objects you've tagged.

1. On your robot's **Control** page in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), find your configured camera component.

>    If you are using a Viam Rover, use the `viam_base` base instead, which presents both the camera and the transform camera together.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If you are using a Viam Rover, use the `viam_base` panel instead, which presents both the camera and the transform camera together.
```

1. Enable both the camera and the transform camera, to show both on the right-hand side.
   On the Viam Rover, and using the transform camera name from earlier in this tutorial, these are `cam` and `my-transform-cam`.
1. Move your smart machine to a position where your camera can see an object that you have tagged in your ML model, and watch your smart machine identify it!

   {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/transform-blue-star.png" alt="The control tab for a rover showing a live camera feed with the transform camera overlay indicating an object match for the blue_star tag" resize="600x" >}}

   {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/transform-red-star.png" alt="The control tab for a rover showing a live camera feed with the transform camera overlay indicating an object match for the red_star tag" resize="600x" >}}

That's it! Your smart machine is now smarter and better able to understand the world around it.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Use your model with code

Once you know your model is working you can write code to change your machines behaviour based on what it detects.
For an example see the following tutorial:

{{< cards >}}
  {{% card link="/tutorials/services/color-detection-scuttle/" %}}
{{< /cards >}}

```

Author: Thank you, great addition.

### Deploy a model

Once your model has finished training, add the [ML model](/services/ml/) service and deploy your model to your smart machine to be able to use it to classify newly-captured images.

To deploy a model to your smart machine:

1. On your robot's **Config** page in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to the **Services** tab.
1. Click the **Create service** button at the bottom of the page, and select **ML Model**, then select **TFLite CPU**.
1. Give the service a name, like `my-mlmodel-service`, then click **Create**.
1. In the resulting ML Model service configuration pane, select **Deploy model on robot**, then select the model you just trained from the **Models** dropdown menu.
1. Click **Save Config** at the bottom of the window to save your changes.

   {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/mlmodel-service-conf.png" alt="The ML model service configuration pane showing the required settings to deploy the my-classifier-model." resize="600x" >}}

## The vision service

> Now that you have deployed an ML model to your smart machine using the ML model service, you are ready to configure your camera to detect the objects you've tagged by using the _vision service_.
> The [vision](/services/vision/) service enables a camera to, among other things, make use of deployed ML models to intelligently identify objects in in a camera feed.
> 
> To enable your smart machine's camera to identify the objects you've tagged, first add the vision service, then add a transform camera to be able to see the tagged objects on the **Control** tab.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have deployed an ML model to your smart machine using the ML model service, you are ready to configure a _vision service_ which can detect the objects you've tagged in images from in a camera feed.

To create a camera that identifies the objects you've tagged and shows the identifications in its camera feed, first add the vision service, then add a transform camera.
You can then see the tagged objects on the **Control** tab.
```

### Add the vision service

1. On your robot's **Config** page in the [Viam app](https://app.viam.com), navigate to the **Services** tab.
1. Click the **Create service** button at the bottom of the page, and select **Vision**, then select **ML Model**.
1. Give the service a name, like `my-vision-service`, then click **Create**.

> 1. In the resulting vision service configuration pane, select the ML model service you just added from the **ML Model** dropdown menu.
> 1. Click **Save Config** at the bottom of the window to save your changes.
> 
>    {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/vision-service-conf.png" alt="The vision service configuration pane showing the ML model service my-mlmodel-service added" resize="500x" >}}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the resulting vision service configuration pane, select the ML model service you just added from the **ML Model** dropdown menu.

   {{< imgproc src="/tutorials/data-management/vision-service-conf.png" alt="The vision service configuration pane showing the ML model service my-mlmodel-service added" resize="500x" >}}

1. Click **Save Config** at the bottom of the window to save your changes.
```

# SMEs: Alexa Greenberg, Natalia Jacobowitz
---

In this tutorial, you will use three Viam services together to enable a smart machine to recognize specific objects in the world around it:

- The [data management](#the-data-management-service) service, to capture images from a camera on your smart machine and sync them to the cloud.
- The [ML model](#the-ml-model-service) service, to manage and deploy a machine learning (ML) model based on these images, once you added tags to the images matching the objects you want to detect.

> - THe [vision](/services/vision/) service, to enable your smart machine's camera to detect objects defined in the ML model on its own.

Author: Whoops, thank you!!

> Working together, these services enable your smart machine to recognize the world around it and make intelligent decisions about the world it sees.

Author: Agreed, thank you!
